+++
title = "<✍️ courses> GT's OMSA course review"
description = ""
slug = "02-001-omsa"
date = 2023-11-03

[taxonomies]
tags = ["course", "omsa", "gatech"]
+++

Here is a list of courses I am taking / planning to take in this program (for the C-track):

| **Course #** | **Semester** |   **Type**   | **Status** |
| -----------: | :----------: | :----------: | :--------: |
|   `CSE 6040` |  2023 Fall   |     Core     |     ✅     |
|  `ISYE 6501` |  2023 Fall   |     Core     |     ✅     |
|  `ISYE 6644` |  2023 Fall   |  OR Elect.   |     ✅     |
|   `CSE 6242` | 2024 Spring  |  Adv. Core   |     ✅     |
|  `ISYE 6740` | 2024 Spring  | Stat. Elect. |     ✅     |
|   `MGT 6203` | 2024 Spring  |  Adv. Core   |     ✅     |
|   `MGT 8803` | 2023 Summer  |     Core     |     ▶️     |
|    `CS 7280` | 2023 Summer  | Track Elect. |     ▶️     |

## Completed Courses

### CSE 6040 Computing for Data Analysis

- **Difficulty**: 5.0 out of 10.0
- **Enjoyment**: 8.5 out of 10.0
- **Format**:
  - HW: Weekly basis. All Jupyter notebooks.
  - Exams: 3 exams.
    - Open book, but no Github Copilot, posting exam questions on forums, or interacting with other people.
    - Similar to homeworks and practice problems.
  - Projects: None.
  - Content:
    - Basics of data wrangling and numerical computation in Python (data structures, Numpy, Scipy sparse matrices, Pandas)
    - Basics of SQL (`SELECT`, `JOIN`, `WHERE`, `GROUPBY`... clauses).
    - Several basic demos of ML algorithms (regression, K-means, PCA).
- **Tips**:
  - Do HW as soon as possible. More difficult to complete hw under time pressure for coding HWs.
  - Do practice questions before exam.

### ISYE 6501 Introduction to Analytics Modeling

- **Difficulty**: 4.0 out of 10.0
- **Enjoyment**: 8.5 out of 10.0
- **Format**:
  - HW: Weekly basis. All R markdowns, with a few exceptions:
    - For linear programming, Python's PuLP is needed.
    - For discrete event simulation, either Arena or Python's SimPy are needed.
  - Exams: 3 exams.
  - Project: 1 project, details released near the end of semester.
  - Content: Learning how to use some ML models in R on data, assess model quality, as well as teaching some basic data science ideas.
- **Tips**:
  - Get used to R and R markdown notebooks, as well as figuring out a suitable workflow, since students have to generate a report file every week.

### ISYE 6644 Simulation

- **Difficulty**: 3.5 out of 10.0
- **Enjoyment**: 8.0 out of 10.0
- **Format**:
  - HW: Weekly basis. Multiple choice questions on Canvas.
  - Exams: 3 exams. Allows cheat sheets.
  - Project: 1 project.
  - Content:
    - Probabilities, statistics bootcamps.
    - The Arena software,
    - Theories for simulating random number generators and stochastic processes.
- **Tips**:
  - Read Prof. Goldsman's book on probabilities and stats.
  - The tip for having a good score on exams is to compile good cheat sheets.
- **Misc.**:
  - Prof. Goldsman's lecture videos has some funny jokes.

### MGT 8803 Business Fundamentals for Analytics

- **Difficulty**: 8.5 out of 10.0
- **Enjoyment**: 5.5 out of 10.0
- **Format**:
  - HW: 2 small ones that accounts for 10% of total grade.
  - Exams: 5 exams for each 5 modules (see below). Allows the use of excel. No cheat sheets.
  - Project: None.
  - Content: 5 modules
    - Financial Accounting
    - Finance
    - Supply Chain
    - Business Strategy
    - Marketing
- **Tips**:
  - The first two modules are extremely packed with info. For people without background related to these fields, all the concepts in these modules can take a fiar while to be digested. Tips for studying for the first two exams
    - Do the self assessment questions repeatedly
    - Get used to the Excel workflow for doing the accounting, finance calculations
    - Check for study cards online, some OMSA alumnis prepared them, e.g. this one on [quizlet](https://quizlet.com/434208661/mgt-8803-accounts-exam-1-flash-cards/).
- **Misc.**:
  - As mentioned above, the first two modules are extremely difficult for me. I pulled three all-nighters at the library just to study for these 2 exams.

## On-going Courses

### CSE 6242: Data and Visual Analytics (DVA)

- **Difficulty**: 9.0 out of 10.0
- **Enjoyment**: 3.5 out of 10.0
- **Format**:
  - HW: 4 homeworks, graded by autograders.
    - HW2 is a lot of d3.js.
    - HW3 is to play with GCP, AWS, Databricks, Azure, ...
    - HW4 builds a random forest.
  - Exams: No exams.
  - Project: We build a book recommender app; check out our [Github repo](https://github.com/Book-Bender/The-Last-Book-Bender).
  - Tips:
    - Study d3 soon. Learn how to make bar charts, line graphs, choropleth maps. Basic knowledge in DOM structure is beneficial and the autograder is very strict about it.
    - Read through the project specifications carefully, don't miss anything as gradings strictly follows it. E.g., all team members has to record an unlisted Youtube video explaining the poster representations, and I mistakenly assumed that only one video per team is required, so I lost 5 pts for it.
- **Misc.**: I personally think that the major takeaway of this course is the experience to collab with other students, as well as trying to pick up unknown technologies as fast as possible. Although the course touches upon several different technologies, most of the time time is spent on reading through long homework specifications and fighting against the autograder.

### ISYE 6740: Computational Data Analytics (CDA)

- **Difficulty**: 8.0 out of 10.0
- **Enjoyment**: 9.5 out of 10.0
- **Format**:
  - This course is basically Machine Learning I. It has mathy parts in it (writing proofs, do hand calculations, implement algorithms, report and explain findings).
  - There are 6 homeworks and 1 final project, no exams.
  - For the final project, our team also worked on a book recommendation system built upon the famous Bookcrossing dataset, using the traditional user-based collaborative filtering (UBCF). The bottleneck we encountered was that the user-item matrix was too large, so we experimented with different interesting approaches to tackle this problem.
- **Misc.**: I enjoyed this course a lot. Lectures are very helpful and clear, and the homeworks are fun to work with.

### MGT 6203: Data Analytics in Business

- **Difficulty**: 3.0 out of 10.0
- **Enjoyment**: 6.5 out of 10.0
<!-- TODO: add contents -->
- **Format**: TBD.
