+++
title = "<ðŸ python> Python package management"
description = "Post on managing Python packages"
slug = "03-004"
date = 2023-02-08
draft = false

[taxonomies]
tags = ["python", "package"]
+++

In this post, I will talk about the Python tools I use for managing Python packages.

## Motivation

We often install packages via `pip` or `pip3`. For example, we can install numpy via:

```bash
pip install numpy
```

Most of the time, this command will install things globally, so all Python files can freely import this package, which can be convenient.

However, some of the issues I encountered with this approach:

1. Extra steps are needed to directly invoke things like `black` formatter or things like `cowsay` from the command line, if I needed, if I don't want to type `python -m black some_python_filename.py`.
2. Sometimes I need to use older versions of packages for homeworks. Tweaking package versions on the global scope doesn't feel right with me - what if I forgot to switch it back?

The solution I found for my first problem was to use `pipx`, and the solution to my second one is to use **virtual environments** (specifically, I used `virtualenv`).

## `pipx`

`pipx` is just like `pip`, with other package managing functionalities.

To use it, install `pipx`, and do `pipx install packagename` to install packages. The command `pipx ensurepath` will ensure the `pipx` binary directories are added to `PATH`.

Now I can happily use `cowsay` (the `-c` flag indicates characters to do the cowsay, and the `-t` flag indicates what text to say):

```bash
cowsay -c tux -t "penguinsay"
```
```
  __________
| penguinsay |
  ==========
               \
                \
                 \
                  .--.
                 |o_o |
                 |:_/ |
                //   \ \
               (|     | )
              /'\_   _/`\
              \___)=(___/
```

*Other useful commands*: One can use `pipx list` to list all packages, and use `pipx uninstall packagename` to uninstall things.

## `virtualenv`

In a nutshell, virtual environments allows users to install packages and make it available only in the specified directory.

There are many ways to create and manage virtual environments. I like to use `virtualenv`. Other built-in Python tools like `venv` is also commonly-used. Some people also use `anaconda` to manage virtual environments.

The workflow are roughly as follows.

1. Think of where you want to start a virtual environment.
  * If you already have an existing one, `cd` into that directory, run:

    ```bash
    virtualenv .
    ```

  * If you want to create a new one with name `myenv`, `cd` into the parent directory of your desired directory for `myenv`, and run:
    
    ```bash
    virtualenv myenv
    ```

2. Now if you go inside your directory, you will see several new directories are created in there. It would look something like this:

  ```
  .
  â”œâ”€â”€ .gitignore
  â”œâ”€â”€ bin
  â”œâ”€â”€ lib
  â””â”€â”€ pyvenv.cfg
  ```

3. To activate the virtual environment, depending on which shell you are using:
  * For `bash`, `zsh`, run:

  ```bash
  source ./bin/activate
  ```
  
  * If you are using other shells - such as Window's command line, or Powershell, or [fish](https://fishshell.com/)(this is the one I use), or nu, than you'll need to change `activate` to `activate.bat` (command line), or `activate.ps1` (for Powershell), or `activate.fish` (for fish shell), or `activate.nu` (for nu shells). One can look at which activate files are present in the new `bin` directory to determine which script to use.

4. After that, the appearance of your shell prompt should change, indicating that the virtual environment has been activated. After that, you may install all the Python packages you needed - these installations will only modify the files inside your current directory.

5. To deactivate, simply type `deactivate` in your shell.

